## Your Life’s Work

Your life's work is to reach your potential. To see what you are capable of. To expand your capacity for knowledge and skill to tackle deeper, more interesting challenges. Your life's work is getting paid to be yourself. To profit from purpose. By doing so, you become a beacon of value for others to follow and improve. The only other options are the opposite. To work for the sole purpose of survival and status. No creativity. No depth. No contribution to something greater than yourself. A selfish and unconscious existence where you become a puppet to society. You will never escape work, but everyone has the potential to fill their day with work that feels like play.

The question isn't "*what do I do?*" The question is "*which way do I go?*" Your life's work, like everything else that is unknown and worthwhile, doesn't become clear in an instant. You feel lost at one moment, but if you have faith, you soon become curious. That curiosity leads to a period of intensity, a season of rapid progress where there is nothing you'd rather be doing but pursuing your purpose. Post-intensity, you enter a period of consistency where you maintain a higher baseline than before. You reach a new level of purpose and continue your ascent from a similar point in the spiral. You may not feel like you are progressing, but if you look down the mountain, you will see how far you've come.

Instead of obsessing over discovering your life's work, pay attention to the opposite: where your life will end up if you keep performing the same actions. If you understand entropy—that all things tend toward disorder—you understand that by doing nothing with your life you choose to slowly drown in chaos. You don’t stay the same. You dig yourself deeper into a hole without trying. The good life demands consistent effort toward reaching a new level of purpose.

But how do we transmute that negative and brutal awareness of what we don't want out of life into something good, true, and beautiful? The secret lies in learning how to think, learning how to learn, and learning how to earn. All of them are found in the same process of making a goal conscious, creating a path to achieve it, and focusing your attention on lever-moving actions that bring results as feedback. We're already aware that infinite knowledge lies in the unknown waiting to be discovered. Now, you need a smart way to course correct along your journey. You can try to wander around the desert in hopes of finding water, but there is a high chance you'll wander in the wrong direction from the start.

When you identify a problem that, once solved, lays a stepping-stone toward your vision, you need a plan. A plan is your surface area for luck, and if you don't have one, or think you don't need one, you may not realize that you are already acting toward one. Or your "plan" is not having a plan (which is still a plan). Now, a plan isn't what most people think it is. It is not a list of steps that will never happen. It is an evolving blueprint that takes shape through trial and error.

A plan contains the rules of the game for how you live your life. The longer you play, the better you get, and you often forget the rules and win anyway. A powerful plan, composed of a vision, mission, projects, levers, and the rest prevent overwhelm as you progress toward your goals. A plan accounts for how you release and constrain entropy to achieve self-generated goals. I want to make this absolutely clear:*nobody can tell you how to achieve your plan*. They can only tell you how they achieved theirs. You can study their processes to help along the way, and you should, but the rest of the process lies in continuing to solve problems.

I don’t say this to sound high and mighty. But I’ve never had a problem with knowing what I want in the future. When people say, “I don’t know what I want,” what they’re really saying is, “I don’t want to do the work it takes to get what I want.” It’s not that you don’t know what you want. It’s that you know what you don’t want—meaning you know what you want—and are hiding from the pain of reinventing yourself. You are hiding from the slow structural redesign of your identity.

I’ve always known what I wanted because it’s extremely simple to observe society and know what I don’t want: A job I hate. Work I don't care about. A body that lacks energy and aesthetics. A partner I can't stop arguing with. A mind that I can't come to grips with. These are the main problems that lie in the conditioned human experience. The problems that are the product of being treated as a machine. If you don't know where to start, start there. You'll be surprised where infinity takes you. From that alone, it’s easy to figure out what I had to do: Become an entrepreneur no matter how many times I fail. Gain the power to get rid of work I don’t want to do. Train on a daily basis and prioritize my energy. Then, allow those three things to open up more opportunities in every domain of life.

Everybody knows that some form of this path is what they are meant to do. Your psyche craves actualization and transcendence. The depth of your being wants these things, but your ego is distracted by things it thinks it wants. That’s the problem. You don’t have a way to focus your mind. You don’t have a plan for your future that has more gravity than the distractions in your life. You struggle to maintain a long-term time horizon and get trapped in never-ending, short-term, stress-inducing tasks.

In this chapter, I want to show you how to become valuable. How to create your own plan. In the next chapter on*Value Creation*, I want to show you how to use that value to persuade and inspire others. I will include snippets for how this chapter's teachings translate to business and entrepreneurship, but ultimately, this entire book can be applied to both yourself and your supporters and customers. I would encourage you to read it twice. Once while improving yourself. Once while packaging up the value you've created to improve others.

Humans make sense of the world in stories. The mind is a story engine. When you learn how to create a story worth telling by forging your own path, how you attract others becomes trivial. Leaders naturally attract followers, and leaders still follow other leaders. So, learn to lead your own life through the depths of the unknown where all untapped potential lies. I will not be discussing details with this. I trust that you can hold these in your mind and figure it out through trial and error.

**Anti-Vision.**We start our story with an anti-vision. The bane of your existence. The first polar end of the worldview you will cultivate. A positive-fear mechanism that kicks you into action. Your anti-vision is the future that you do not want to live.

Start a running note of experiences you do not want to repeat. The material you don’t care to learn. The work you don’t care to complete. The arguments you don’t wish to have. You won’t get rid of them in an instant. You are meant to identify them as problems to be solved.

**Vision.**If you don’t have a vision, you are lost. You can’t create outcomes, so you are doomed to the mechanical living of determined outcomes. Every decision you make in any domain of your life must be filtered through your vision. That is how you bring meaning to your actions and minimize distractions.

Write down exactly what you want out of life. Don’t miss a detail but realize this is an iterative process. You won’t get it right the first time around, and you probably never will. That’s not the point. Spend thirty minutes generating a minimum viable vision. Come back to it often to add, subtract, and improve as your desires inevitably change with your failures.

The main trait of an entrepreneur, a brand, or a company is their vision. Without a vision, your supporters can't see where you are going and why it benefits them. Without an anti-vision, they don't have a metaphorical enemy to rally against. They don't have awareness of the life they don't want to live, so you give them no reason to change it.

**Mission.**Your mission is the most important thing in your life. It is the bridge between what you do and don’t want. The path you are forging toward your vision. Your life's work. Reaching your potential. Anything that leads to decay is a distraction that must be wrestled with and pinned.

Your mission evolves with awareness of new beliefs, opportunities, and knowledge. Your mission requires faith. You can’t see the next step unless you take the first. And once you do, the second may be completely different than anything you could have possibly imagined.

**Standards.**You aren’t where you want to be because you are okay with where you are. But most of your standards are unconscious. As an example, if you are okay with having a few dollars to your name, you won't register that as a problem to be solved. You relinquish your agency. This isn't negative, this is empowering. If you view it as negative, you may be holding onto a rogue belief that shoots fear into your psyche because it is trying to survive the change. Your old identity won't go down without a fight. Be mindful of that.

Standards are absorbed from your environment. The friends you hang out with. The books you read. The media you consume. The parents who raise you. The teachers who knew it all. The greatest decision you can make is to change your physical, mental, and spiritual environments for good. Immerse yourself in a pool of new people, new ideas, and new potentials that challenge you to create, expand, and transcend.

**Goals.**Big goals are for direction. Small goals are for clarity. You don’t need motivation when the task in front of you is so stupidly simple that you can’t help but complete it. Break down your vision into goals by decade, year, month, week, and day. They are your guide, not your master. Be stubborn with vision and loose with details. Your goals will change, and that’s okay.

As stated, a plan is not a list of steps that won't happen. It is an evolving blueprint. Your anti-vision, vision, and goals are necessary for decision-making, but do not hesitate to iterate as your wisdom develops. Goals come after vision, not before.

**Projects.**Projects are how you turn problems into solutions. Projects create a frame for your mind to expand into. Projects, after a period of invested mental energy, become a magnet for ideas and experience. Serendipity increases. Pattern recognition increases. Dopamine increases to signal information that helps you actualize the project.

Learning comes from struggle, not memorization. You need a series of tangible projects to build that will actualize your vision. Turn your goals into projects. Architect an outline, milestones, deadlines, and areas of research. Build, then learn. Start the project, expose your lack of knowledge and skill, and use that as a reference point for your education.

**Constraints.**A fool becomes rich at the expense of everything good in life. A creative becomes rich at the expense of his choice. Limitations on your goals force creativity. The question is, what are you*not*willing to sacrifice to achieve your goals?

The creative challenge appears when you attempt to achieve a goal without betraying your vision. You can become rich without sacrificing your family. You can become healthy without sacrificing your work. You can become valuable without sacrificing what makes life worth living.

**Levers.**Every day, you need priority tasks that move the lever toward your projects, goals, and vision from the ground up. These are often perceived as boring fundamentals without the cultivation of a sense of mastery. Do what needs to be done but grip your vision as the anchor into the unknown. If you aren’t making progress, it’s because you aren’t moving levers, even if you think you are.

**Challenge.**When a novice plays against a master, neither has fun. The novice becomes anxious while the master becomes bored unless they are not playing to win. When your skill is the perfect match for the challenge of a situation, the world goes quiet, and you become one with the problem to be solved.

Challenge is the source of enjoyment. Enjoyment is found on the tightrope between boredom and anxiety. Enjoyment comes from solving problems. The path to meaningful living is often found in a simple shift in perspective. Problems aren't the bane of your existence. They're the reason for it.

**Curiosity.**Be willing to steer off course and discover new potential. It is too easy to lock ourselves in the mechanical routine we were trying to escape. Be curious. Dive deep into your interests. Let few questions go unanswered. Avoid getting locked into paradigms and beliefs that narrow your mind on one idolized path. Your vision is like a battery. You must fuel it with experience, education, and misdirection.

When you are lost, run through this process. When your relationships are failing, run through this process. When your business won’t get off the ground, run through this process. Every successful interaction with reality starts and ends with a clear image of the want, clarity on how to achieve it, and creative execution to acquire rare results.

## Value Creation

Few people have realized this, but you can learn and build almost anything thanks to the internet. You have the mind of Einstein and DaVinci in your pocket. If you have the agency and desire, you can find a path to acquiring the knowledge you need to build what you want. It's an uncertain path, but very possible.

Building a website used to take multiple engineers to build and maintain. Now, you can sign up for a website builder, choose a template, change it to your liking, and not have to worry about it much after that. Even further, with the development of AI tools, you can simply tell it to build a website with certain specifications and it will spit out the raw code for you. Then, you can chat with the AI to refine it further, learn how to host it, and learn how to start getting customers.

This seems to be the general trend of today's world. What used to require more resources and labor now requires less, and with AI, "less" is inching closer to zero. For high-agency individuals, this is liberating, as they can unleash their nature as deep generalists. For low-agency individuals, this is oppressive, as they themselves are tools that can be replaced. We will discuss this later. For now, understand this: The ability to earn with your mind, not your time, labor, or looks, is how you become in control of what you do and how much you make. Especially as we go deeper into this uncertain future.

When anyone can create anything, getting people to*care*becomes the problem, and finding people in the first place stems from that. Most people think their problem is that nobody finds their interests interesting, but the reality is that they don't know how to make their interests interesting to other people. You adopt new interests every week, month, and year. That means other people can too if you understand the process behind what generates interest. When you can do that, you unlock the key to creating something valuable. It's less about what you create and more about how you create it, why people should care about it, and what makes it unique. Let's start with that.

Money is a unit of value. Value is a measure of how much people care multiplied by the magnitude of problems you solve, and problems are infinite. Power is the degree to which one can change behavior. In the past, the main way of acquiring power was through force or deception. But when gunpowder came along, force became a less viable method (for obvious reasons). Deceit still exists, but if you choose that as a way to make money, it's only a matter of time before reviews and reputation catch up with you. It's not wise. It's not hard to see that money that stems from force or deception won't make you happy.

We all want people to care about our creations, and persuasion is the only way to do that while still being able to sleep at night. Persuasion, in the way we will define it, is the act of inspiring people to see the importance of what you do by how it impacts their life for the better. If power is the degree to which one can change behavior, and behavior change is the root solution to both personal and global problems, then persuasion is the most ethical form of power anyone can develop. When most people want something, they explain what they want without understanding the mind of the other person, so they rarely receive it. Learning to persuade allows you to strive for mutual benefit—a positive-sum game—because you are able to articulate their desires often better than they can.

As an entrepreneur, you are not only persuading one person but an increasing number of people over time. The way you get in front of those people is through*media.*In the past, this was through handwritten letters, newspapers, the radio, billboards, or TV, which are highly limited for obvious reasons. Paid advertisements and other forms of media are also promising, but for beginners who don't know a thing about it, I do not believe it is the wise option. Of course, be adaptable. We're heading toward an uncertain future, but the fact remains that you will need to persuade with media as one major part of your entrepreneurial journey.

It just so happens that the highest leverage place to create—right now, at least—is on the internet. It is the path of high agency. You don't need permission to create something and post it on the internet. You don't need permission to navigate idea space and find the information you need. This may change in the future, but that only reinforces the point. No matter if it's the internet or intergalactic space or virtual reality, the answer has been and always will be to share the value you acquire in a place where the right people can find it.

With the internet came the under-appreciated power of building an audience. In the past, there weren't any good ways of retaining communication access with the people who trust you and support your work. As people have grown tired of centralized institutions controlling the flow of attention, more people have been taking to the creator economy as their source of news, education, and sense making. To me, it seems like the path forward for sovereign individuals is to build their own audience, rather than being at the whim of any given system that allows you to tap into their audience. Publishers, record labels, employers, and the rest. When you have an audience, you can write a book, make music, or find work by the simple act of sharing what you do, who you do it for, and why you do it in public.

To dumb this down, you need to attract people to what you create with persuasive writing, speaking, video, or images. As we will discuss in the next chapter, the best way for most people to start is with writing. Anyone can write. Now, this statement typically makes specialists lose their minds. They don't want to do anything other than type code, make music, or design graphics. They want to focus on their craft but don’t realize their craft is worthless if others don’t know or care about it. They don't realize that the only way they can currently make a living is to work for someone else who creates the media that brings in customers.

There are a few moving pieces here. In business, you need a product—your value packaged in a way that others can benefit from—and a group of people who care about that product enough to buy it. You can place your product in front of people, but if they can’t see why it benefits their lives, they won’t care about it. You can have what you believe is the most valuable product, but if you don’t place it in front of people, they don’t have a chance to care about it.

This pattern is reflected in relationships. You can place yourself in front of a group of potential partners, but if they can’t see where you fit into their life, they won’t care about you. You can believe you are the most developed individual, but if you sit inside all day, potential partners don’t have a chance to care about you.

For both scenarios, some individuals won’t have an identity that meshes with yours. You or your product can be objectively promising, but it won’t matter if the individual doesn’t have a mind that can relate. You must be in the right place, at the right time, in front of the right people. When you publish your work in public, with intention, persistence, and iteration, you increase the surface area of people who may care about your work. For those who think this sounds uncertain or difficult, I must remind you that the other option—what you've been doing—is*more*uncertain or difficult while hiding under a veil of comfort and ease.

As a species, we are wired to seek approval from others. We don’t want to be outcasts from our tribe. That desire has built the beautiful, self-corrective world we live in. If we don’t want to be cast out, we must contribute value to a group of people who can benefit from that value and give us what we want in return. If we don’t contribute value, we close ourselves off to the progress, purpose, and profit that makes life worth living.

The point is clear: You need people and a product. You attract people to that product with media. But neither of those things—media or product—are valuable in and of themselves. You need to package them up as an*offer.*You don't ask people to pay you. You offer them value in exchange for another form of value. In the case of a product, it's money. In the case of media, it's attention. Both are valuable. Don't waste people's time.

Value is perception. Perception is the difference between a basic t-shirt that costs a few bucks and a luxury t-shirt that costs a few hundred. It's the difference between a Rolex or Porsche and any other watch or car you could buy for much less. This isn't to say that you need to position yourself as a luxury brand—because both options have clearly led to successful business ventures—but it is to say that different people value different things. One man's trash is another man's treasure, as the platitude goes.

So, how do we shape perception? How do we package up our media and product that allows us to leverage the power of persuasion? How do we make ourselves and our creations valuable? The solution is quite simple, but as with any skill, it can take a lifetime to master. Answer these five questions.

**1. Who can you help the most?**Personality is the largest influence on perception. Someone who does not identify as a coffee drinker will not see the value in an expensive cup of craft coffee. Someone who identifies as a "car person" will not see the value in a cheap and easily purchasable car.

By all measures, the most fulfilling and impactful person to help is yourself. People with a similar personality. People who are attracted to your vision and anti-vision. People who have shared goals but aren't sure of a*way*to achieve those goals that they, of all people, will enjoy and stick with. When you create for your past self, the rest of this process falls into place. This is the topic of the*Self-Monetization*chapter.

**2. What problem are you solving?**The first step of persuasion, storytelling, sales, self-improvement, and progress as a whole is identifying the most burning problem to be solved and making the person aware of it. If they aren't aware of a problem, they won't have the desire to change. Your creation will lose all potential to be perceived as valuable. The problem*always*comes first. In stories, it sparks curiosity and hooks the reader. It is the first qualifying checkpoint the reader uses to determine whether it's worth their time to continue or find something else that tickles the right part of their brain.

The levels of problem awareness are unaware, problem aware, solution aware, product aware, and most aware. Most people you come across will lie between unaware and solution-aware. Your job is to speak to them where they are. You aren't going to speak to someone who isn't aware they have a problem the same way you would speak to someone who's already tested solutions. This requires creativity and dexterity. It can't be taught through words. It can only be learned through persistent trial and error on a long enough time horizon, which is why so few people have this irreplaceable skill.

In your writing, speaking, designs, videos, products, and the rest, you must make an educated guess at the majority awareness level of the people who will see the media or product*.*This is how you capture attention in a world of noise. Pull from your personal experience to start, then keep a finger on the pulse of the information in the space you are trying to join. What problem did you solve in your life? What was your mindset then? What objections came to mind when presented with a solution? As you come across persuasive ideas you can use on your journey, write them down and keep them safe.

**3. Where do they want to be?**The second step of persuasion is the desired outcome. The purpose. The direction. The ideal lifestyle that—once the problem is solved—they make progress toward. You don't need to give them the full solution, as that's near impossible due to the nature of change and evolution, but you can help them take a few steps, and that's more valuable than staying the same. Entropy isn't kind to those who stay the same.

Pull from your vision and get specific. What are you helping them achieve? What is the*transformation*? The more specific you can get with this, the more desire it will generate in a reader, viewer, or listener who is already aware of the problem. Most people don't want to "revolutionize their mind," but everyone wants to "have ten less negative thoughts by tomorrow."

**4. When will they get results?**The greatest marketing strategy is clarity paired with pure honesty. When the reader can make sense of how long it will take them to solve the problem and achieve the goal, they are much more likely to act. Creating a timeframe—like six months, fourteen days, or five minutes—does two things: First, it requires you to shrink or expand your content or product to be more direct and impactful. Second, it adds another structural pillar to the reader's mind. The more clarity they have, the more likely they are to change their behavior, and behavior change is the only metric that matters. Otherwise, your content or product won't get results, and they are not valuable.

As you can tell, these tips are not immediately practical. I am not trying to tell you exactly what to do, I am planting seeds of awareness in your mind. If you were to take these ideas with you as you push into the unknown, you*will*notice these persuasion principles everywhere you go, and that will teach you more than the words on this page. That, by all measures, is the best way to learn. Perspective, persistence, and pattern recognition. Keep these ideas top of mind as you go about your new life.

**5. Why should they care?**Persuasion ultimately boils down to a strong stack of "whys" that empower the reader to change their mind, then their behavior, then their life. The simplest way to do this is by thinking in terms of pains and benefits. This is best done by writing them out on paper and capturing more as ideas come to mind.

Take the big problem you plan to solve and break it down into smaller pain points. You are attempting to amplify the problem to show the reader that it is a higher priority than they think because the longer the problem goes unsolved, the more damage it can do. If the big problem is "weight loss," then a pain point can include how feeling sluggish can pull energy away from their work or relationships. If we continue to ask, "Why should they care?" then we can dig deeper until we reach the core. Having little energy to pour into your work can cause poor performance. Poor performance eventually leads to earning less or losing the source of income. In the relationship, their partner either joins them and the attraction fades, or their partner fixes the problem, deems them unfit, and leaves.

On the more positive side, you can balance out the pain points with the benefits of reaching where they want to be once the problem is solved. In this case, they do better at work—leading to benefits I don't need to state—and create the potential for a relationship of attraction, desire, and fulfillment due to the increase in energy and confidence.

**How do you solve the problem?**You solve the problem with a process. A process that you've created through experimentation in a way that works for your personality. Your process*is*the product, but that process can come in many forms, and sometimes it needs education or guidance to implement it best. Of course, a product like a cup or shirt isn't a process, but they also aren't solutions to a problem unless they are positioned as such. At that point, a simple cup or shirt can very well be a part of a process to solve that problem. If you want to be more persuasive when selling a commodity, then you will have to get creative as to how that product can help someone progress through the story toward your vision.

A process, in this context, is a creative system that breeds knowledge, skill, and awareness to bridge the gap between problem and solution. You create this process by either reflecting on your experience as to how you achieved the goal or creating the process through experimentation.

You can find a plethora of daily planners on the internet, but if you want to create your own, your process needs to be slightly better for the personality you are selling to. If you are attempting to create a process for the goal of productivity, you would purchase multiple planners, experiment with them, pull the best parts from each, refine it with your own ideas, package your solution up, and put it on the market.

In summary, anything you create does not come in a form that is often perceived as valuable. You must determine who it's for, what problem you solve, where they want to be, when they will get results, and why they should care. Any one of those will increase the persuasive capacity of your creation, but all of them together will make your offer irresistible.

## The Meta Skill

Before humans, simple organisms like amoebas could only gather information with the sense of touch. They only knew what was in their direct vicinity. As evolution hurled forward, organisms were able to gather far away information with sight, smell, and sound. Then, memory developed, and animals could base their decisions on the past.

When humans came around—and after a very long period, slow progress that then increased exponentially—we gained the power to control the planet. We have become creators of our destiny, not just consumers of our environment. Information could now be stored in consciousness, not only genes or traces of memory. When writing was invented during the axial period, information took a step toward universality.

Information is what we use to avoid danger, discover new potential, acquire knowledge, and make decisions that lead to a good future. It started with songs, myths, and stories told around campfires. It advanced with the printing press, radio, and television. Now, attention and the spread of information are dominated by the media. With the emergence of the internet, there is hope. People no longer need to rely on either the information in their environment or the information controlled by institutions to make better decisions and achieve any version of success. Writing and speaking are the foundational modes of communication, and since speaking was often written down to preserve, writing as a whole has acted as a collective memory, allowing humans to avoid past mistakes and thrive.

Here's where it gets interesting. Information is the code of your mental operating system. As humans, we adopt goals we are forced, deceived, or persuaded to adopt. Then, we collect ideas to help us achieve those goals. As these goals and ideas form an interconnected web of systems, we call it our identity, or self, and it either limits or expands our potential in life.

Before the internet—and still to this day, but to a lesser degree—the spread of information was centralized. The government, education and employment systems, religious establishments, and mainstream media held the most attention in the minds of children who grew into parents. Parents held the attention of their children, who went on to engage, learn, and work for a groundless construct that no longer serves us.

With the goals of society injected as a homing mechanism into your mind, your only option was to become a hard worker toward the goals of that society. The information you gathered was perceived through the lens of those goals. The default outcome for the masses was slavery. Not physical, but mental. This is important. The ideas that occupy your head are what determine your potential. If the only ideas you are exposed to are the ones that your goals allow you to perceive, and those goals weren't decided by you but where your attention was placed, and the default magnet for your attention was society at large, then there doesn't seem to be anything more important than changing and contributing to the primary set of ideas floating where most of the attention is. Right now, that's on the internet.

The internet has sparked the potential for the decentralized spread of information to those of high agency. There is still centralization in the media, but it will only continue to dissolve as more individuals create the media they want to see in the world. The ideas that hold the most mental real estate will determine the outcome of humanity. We need more writers, entrepreneurs, and creators who develop their minds to distribute valuable knowledge and products that impact the course of evolution. Most people don’t need more assignments. They need more powerful ideas that shape their worldview so they can think and earn for themselves.

The world needs more creators. More synthesizers. More people who set their sights on a vision, develop themselves accordingly, solve problems along the way, and pass down their knowledge with what they create so others can benefit. To create is to pass down knowledge. To pass down knowledge is to contribute to the cumulative progress of humanity. If we always had to start over from scratch, we wouldn't be very developed as a species, and we probably wouldn't be here right now. Writing, on any scale, is responsible for the world we live in today.

Let me make this as clear as I can. In a world where most people are worried about what skills they should learn, start writing. The mark of a free individual is that they do many things throughout their life. This requires them to learn how to learn, how to think, and how to earn. Writing checks the boxes of all three. Schools and jobs tell us what to learn, hinder our ability to think, and prepare us to earn within narrow boundaries. Writing is how you solidify understanding of your studies, mold your thoughts in physical form, and create something worth paying for.

Writing is a meta-skill. If you strive for mastery, writing is a shortcut to future-proofing yourself because to write in a valuable way, you must write in public. When you write in public, you are exposed to feedback from which you error-correct to improve your writing. To improve your writing is to improve your thinking, leaning, and earning. Through that error correction, you inadvertently learn psychology, marketing, sales, persuasion, human nature, and the topic being written about. Writing is how you engage in an interest-based education.

Now that technical work and intelligence are on tap thanks to AI, what is left is taste, agency, coherence. Humans must provide the vision, experience, and execution to bring their ideas to life. They must tell a story, and what better way to practice storytelling than by writing them in all shapes and forms?

Writing is permissionless leverage. The front end of the internet is media. The backend of the internet is code. Writing is the foundation of impactful media. Posts, articles, video scripts, outlines, newsletters, and more all start with writing. With the advances in LLMs and artificial intelligence tools, code has begun to take the shape of natural language. Clear writing—paired with an understood goal—leads to clear code. Of course, this isn’t perfect at the time of this book, but it may be shortly after. The point is that anything you create will start with and potentially end with writing. If it doesn't end in writing, then it ends in the physical or digital manifestation of knowledge, which can probably be articulated and passed down with writing. In the future, the cornerstone habit of all successful work will be writing. What we consider writing today may change, but only because our language itself may change. We may speak with new concepts that breed efficiency of information, but writing itself will continue to persist as it has.

The incredible aspect of writing is its accessibility. You already write every day. You may have a journal for your thoughts. You may send messages to your friends and family. You may send emails to your coworkers or boss. You don't need an English degree to think, so you don't need one to write. Understand that the only place to start is at the start. Rock bottom. Absolute zero. This should be liberating. You get to make a fool of yourself when nobody is watching. Writing is only daunting if you are projecting too far into the unknown. Writing becomes less daunting when you view it as a tool to create a future you do have control over.

Writers are DJs with ideas. When I write, I do not attempt to write it all at once. I start with an outline. I jot out thoughts, topics, sections, and key points. Then, I let it sit. I allow that outline to frame how I perceive the world. When you have an outline, you have a structure from which your mind can think. From there, I let ideas stick out to me when I read, watch, or listen to information I am curious about. Then, piece by piece, I add to my writing—like brush strokes of ideas—and refine it until it is almost complete. This is where most people let their writing collect dust on their metaphorical bookshelf. This is where I publish no matter how I feel about the writing because I know it is not optional for the ideal future I want to sustain. People don’t care about the words; they care about how the words make them feel. Perfection is for the unsuccessful. Writing is how you explore idea space when pure thinking falls flat. To write is to store ideas in a way that allows your mind to discover new ones.

Start small. Use the value creation framework in the previous chapter to ideate media like a post or article, or to ideate a product like a short book, software, or gadget. Yes, even products that aren't writing are best created through writing. Of course, you can also choose to write without a destination and see where you end up in the unknown. Pick a topic. Outline the problem, goal, process between them, pain points of potential readers, and benefits of achieving the goal. Structure it into a coherent line of reasoning to persuade a specific individual.

If you can, write every morning with your ideal future in mind. It will change your life.

## Self-Monetization

The only way to control your income, and therefore your life, in today’s society, is to create a product. For the sake of this book, I use the term "product" to represent anything that is a*creation*that you plan to give to someone in exchange for something, be it a few dollars or whatever form of money may emerge. For most people, and as a recurring theme, their entire life has been spent building everyone else's dreams at the expense of their own. This seems to be one common self-deception: You believe selling a product is unethical or evil, but if you don't create a product, you will work for someone who does, or you will become the product of that which funds your lifestyle—the government writing universal basic income checks is one potential example. The average person doesn't have any other options. I'll leave it up to you which is the lesser of three evils, and if you*really*want to reject them in hopes that you find a better way to contribute to the world.

When you venture into entrepreneurship, the first three words you'll learn to hate are these: "Choose a niche." For the unaware, a*niche*is a specific market that is best illustrated by the phrase, "If you target everybody, you target nobody." The purpose of a niche like "bioenergetic nutrition for those with low thyroid function" is to narrow your focus on understanding the individual whose big problem you plan to solve. When you get specific on*who you can help the most,*you lay the groundwork for a valuable product. Now, there isn't a problem with a niche. In fact, it's a necessary aspect of doing business. The problem comes with*choosing*a niche . . . as if it's something external that must be found.

When you*choose*a niche, you end up like most beginner entrepreneurs scratching their heads and begging to go back to their life of poisoned comfort. You either stick it out long enough to make a decent chunk of change, or you realize that choosing a niche and a life of fulfillment mix like oil and water. You end up working with people you don't care about on projects you don't care about doing work you don't care about. You escaped narrow, repetitive, and assigned work just to end up in the same exact spot with a few more luxuries that can't patch up the hole in your soul.

There are a few more issues with this approach. First, you don't have experience with a niche you choose, and most entrepreneurs fail because they try to solve a problem they haven't experienced. And since you will probably never experience that problem outside of theory, you are working by proxy. You are studying the map, not the territory. It can work, and plenty of people have found success with this method, but I am here to help guide you toward a life of deep purpose. Second, it prioritizes*finding,*not attracting or becoming. You learn a skill for someone else. You take on projects you do not create. You chose the first problem to solve but have no control over the next hundred that spring up.

What seems to be the biggest problem with*choosing*a niche is that it is static. You box yourself into a little bubble of thoughts. Similar to the pursuit of prestige that comes from focusing on one area of study like a college degree, this creates a stupefying conformity that has high potential for replacement. You can only learn so much within a box. The beauty of*becoming*the niche is that it evolves as you do. Your niche isn't a static target—it's a living, breathing extension of your personal development. As you solve new problems, discover new interests, and create new knowledge, your business naturally expands to encompass these areas. Choosing a niche is for specialists.

Let me make this simple for you:*You are the niche.*Most people spend their lives searching for their niche, never realizing they're standing in it. They fail to practice self-awareness, the greatest business, marketing, and sales skill. You already purchase products that improve your life. You already get hooked in by marketing that doesn't feel like marketing. You already consume information that piques your interest. But what you may not realize is that you can reverse engineer this entire process, study it's parts, and recreate it with*you*as the central pillar that makes every aspect of it unique.

When you are the niche, you don't need to obsess over new market opportunities. However, you do need to obsess over solving your own problems. If you were to solve your own problems and sell the solution, you would kill two birds with one stone: Self-improvement and other-improvement. Purpose and profit. No amount of complaining or excuse-making will change the fact that if everyone were to do that over and over again (solving problems and creating solutions), engaging in the process of error correction to reverse entropy, everyone would have something unique and real with high potential value. Your identity is distinct from every other person on this planet in some way. When you relinquish that power by "choosing a niche," you open up room for competition. Conformity is a finite game. Authenticity is an infinite game.

The thing is, starting a business costs a lot of money, right? You need capital and a warehouse and a marketing budget and an LLC and all of these other things,*right?*Wrong. Remember, the way you get in front of other people is through media. The most accessible way to do that, at least right now, is on the internet, with writing as the overarching skill that shapes everything else you do. That is an incredible starting point for almost everyone. The internet and writing are a meta path. If everyone does it, there is no increase in saturation and competition because they are a vessel for any type of information, interest, or skill.

Individuals in search for their life's work are realizing the power of this path. They are becoming*one-person media companies.*After they build an audience—no matter what size—that trusts and supports them enough to sustain work they enjoy, they have two options.

First, they can be like Justin Welsh. Before his one-person business reaching $8 million in revenue at 92% margins, he worked as an executive at two billion-dollar healthcare companies. High pressure. Little time. Big payday. He was making good money, but his personal life took a backseat. Eventually, he reached his breaking point. When Justin realized that he had a few skills that more people—not just his employers—could benefit from, he started building his own thing on the side.

Justin's progression went like this. First, he did not quit his job outright. He saw the opportunity the internet presented and started sharing his knowledge through writing. His skills, his opinions, and most importantly, his story—the thing that makes his skills desirable to those who relate. In fact, that's still all he does to this day. He writes. He has seen immense success without the need for more time-consuming skills like video filming and editing. By following the principles of value creation, he started attracting an audience of thousands of people.

Given enough time and error correction, Justin created high-margin media-based products. The first was business consulting. Since he had marketing and sales knowledge, he decided to work one-on-one virtually with small businesses and solopreneurs who could use his expertise. And since he had an audience of people to tap into, this wasn't the most difficult thing in the world to pull off. This consulting offer allowed him to charge more, work with fewer people, and earn enough to leave his career behind in the pursuit of his calling. As his audience grew, he knew he could help more people, so he took the systems he had helped others with and packaged them up in the form of a self-paced course. This leveraged approach allowed him to take full control of his lifestyle.

Justin built a business around his life, not a life around his business. His family and well-being come first. His public writing does the rest, attracting people to the value he has available to anyone who is the right fit. The point with Justin's path is this: You can build a one-person business, make more than enough money to live a good life, and focus on the things that matter most to you without the outdated business bloat of the past.

I was in the same situation for a few years, but I decided to pursue more. I'm young, so why not push myself a bit? At the age of sixteen, I'd observed society enough to realize that the conventional path—school, job, and retirement—wasn’t for me. As I became interested in psychology and philosophy, I realized that the default path could not possibly lead to a good life. So, I started experimenting. I scoured the internet for education on how to earn a living doing what I wanted to do. I had always wanted to do something creative, and I could see in plain site that public figures on the internet were doing just that. I tried quite a few things. Photography, web design, physical minimalist wallets, and more. But it wasn't that easy. I spent nearly five years—as a young person who could scrape by working part-time jobs—becoming good at one thing: Failure. I accepted my fate and got a job with one of the skills I had picked up, web design, but knew that wasn't the end of the story.

With persistence, those failures turned into clarity. I knew that if even*one*person could execute a series of steps to do what they enjoyed for work, I could too. It may take me much longer than them, because I needed time to piece together the psychological skill puzzle by exploring the unknown, but it was possible. While at my job, I procrastinated most of my work in favor of working on my own endeavors. It happened slowly. Family friends started to pay me for small websites. Using knowledge from both the job and my previous failures, my little websites turned into custom lead generation flows for service businesses. Within about eight months, I was able to leave my new job behind.

But now I had a new problem. I was working for people I didn’t care about on projects I didn’t care about. I had built myself straight into a new job. With that problem framing my perception, I began to see the internet in a rediscovered light. People were sharing web design, self-improvement, spirituality, and psychology knowledge under their own names. I loved those topics. Why couldn't I do the same? Even further, what was stopping nearly everyone with an internet connection—heading into a digital first future—from creating this "public resume" to attract opportunities that aligned with them as a person?

As the ideas came together in my head, I started writing free posts, articles, and newsletters. Then I started writing small digital books and guides around my interests. Then people started asking me questions, so I wrote them thoughtful replies. Then I created a paid community platform where I wrote weekly articles, made useful templates, and hosted live calls. It was eye opening to see that people—even such a small group—*wanted*to listen to what I had to say, let alone pay for it. After all this time, I realized that I was writing so much that writing itself was the missing piece all along. It was something that I, someone who despised English class in school, could publish in a place called the internet that could reach thousands to millions of people per month.

As I got better at writing, my one-person media company evolved to reflect my new obsession: writing. I loved to teach it, and I had a unique way of utilizing the skill for more than just writing essays to be graded by a school. My audience and customers didn't care about writing, they cared about how it helped them attract supporters to their skills, interests, and expertise. I weaved my personal philosophy into my skill set, put that perspective in my first book,*The Art of Focus,*and started to teach it to those in my audience who wanted to do the same, because that's who you, and I, can help the most.

My story was similar to Justin Welsh's up until last year. I made enough to live a peaceful life, but something was still missing. Even when I thought I had solved all my problems, yet another emerged. Problems are infinite, problems are soluble, and my realization that I loved personal development led to a new path revealing itself. The next level of challenge—and therefore fulfillment and growth—was using the resources I had acquired to start my own company. A writing software that fit my needs to perfection. I disliked having to split my focus between various apps that added friction to my workflow, but I didn't register starting a full company as within the realm of possibility until now. I hadn't solved the problem that made the next, more purposeful problem available to discover.

Business became my vessel for personal growth, not some shallow and isolated pursuit of money that small-minded people believe it to be. By building products I cared about, others like myself started to care about them too. From manning my own operation to managing a team of people, I had transformed into an entirely new person. A person I believe my younger self would be proud of.

Now here's the thing: this path is not limited to information alone. You don't have to write media-based products like a book or teach what you know, but I still believe that is one of the best*starting points*for most people. When you log onto the internet, you can easily find individuals solving their own problems and selling the solution. Some people suffer from migraines and create blue light glasses that fit their style and ease their pain. Others researched the harms of polyester clothing and created 100% cotton clothing lines that finally fit them well. In rare personal situations, someone who suffers from eczema—who hated the soulless white bars of soap for sensitive skin—can pursue an interest-based education in horticulture and botanicals to create a line of soap that brought life and relaxation back into their routine. All these examples illustrate that an old product paired with your story paired with the internet can overcome the overwhelming sense of competition in the business space.

Jordan Peterson is yet another example that helps drive the overarching point home. He is not your typical influencer, although many people believe him to be. Once an everyday professor, Peterson has written best-selling books, started his new Peterson Academy for a better education experience, and has spoken at public events around the world. The important point is this: Peterson uses the best tools at his disposal to pursue his life's work and impact the most people. Social media has been a useful tool to do that, but knowing Peterson, he will utilize whatever emergence in technology that will allow him to continue this path. His story, his knowledge, and his depth outweigh any flavor-of-the-day marketing hack. People can't help but be attracted to his mind. And his mind, unlike his time or labor, can be distributed to anyone with an internet connection.

I often wonder what the great teachers of the past—like Watts or Socrates—would do in today’s world. I have no doubt that they would take advantage of how media has evolved. They would realize how limited they were in only writing physical books hoping that their word would spread. Thanks to the internet, great minds have a semblance of control over how far their value can reach.

As we push further into the future, we can already see people doing more as one person than teams of a dozen more could in the recent past. Media is the most accessible and high margin starting point for now, and when paired with the essence of your being, it is difficult to replace, but there are incredible options becoming more available to the average person. In my own start-up and start-ups I admire, members of the team are taking on the entrepreneurial mindset even more.

Single skills have always been replaced by machines. This won't stop. During each round of evolution, humans abstract out a layer to a broader set of meta skills. Now that artificial intelligence can spit out production-level code at the click of a button, individuals can put on multiple hats and tie them together with taste and coherence. What used to be a software engineer is turning into a design engineer or product engineer. What used to be an author is now a full-fledged media department. The engineer can spend less brain power on design, coding, and product. The author can do the same for writing, marketing, and sales. But the fact remains that a human must orchestrate the tools at their disposal toward an evolving vision for the future.

## Become a Creator

For most of human history—millions of years—creativity was reserved for the gods. Somewhere along the way, they used this power to create humans. Or at least that’s what we believed. Humans were these helpless little beings subject to the wrath of hunger, cold, predators, and each other. They couldn't explain the world around them, so they couldn't use that knowledge to create better means of survival. But slowly, then all at once, the tides have turned in the last thousand years or so.

We began to understand how things work. We built tools that allowed us to survive in any environment, unlike animals, from freezing cold to extreme heat to outer space. The entire face of the earth has transformed to be a more hospitable place (with obvious consequences), thanks to the invention of machines, harnessing of energy, and our desire for discovery. Humans have taken over the role of creator, but so many have lost, or have never found, their path. They are not entrepreneurs, the great high-agency generalists. They are employees, the subservient task-completing machines. Remember, entrepreneurship and employment are a state of mind and are not limited to a specific type of work.

Unfortunately, we don't know what the future holds. We don't know how many jobs and livelihoods technology like artificial intelligence will displace. We don't know whether Earth will end up a garden or a wasteland. And on a personal level, we don't know if any of the actions we take will lead to the life we want. But we know two things for certain:*Problems are infinite. Problems are soluble.*No matter how developed we as a species or the technology we develop becomes, you can find solace in the fact that there will always be a next problem to solve. Thankfully, that's all you need to know if you want to live a life of meaning, money, and mastery.

If happiness—or enjoyment—is the combination of progress being made and contribution to something greater than yourself, and both are accomplished by solving problems, for yourself and others, and problems are solved through creativity, then the only logical and fundamental aim for your future is to embody creativity by becoming a creator. In other words, you find the intersection of purpose and profit by creating solutions to problems*you*deem interesting, passing on those solutions to contribute to the progress of humanity, and repeating the process when the next set of more complex problems arise. Although problems become more complex, you become more equipped with knowledge, skill, and experience to solve them. Life gets better as problems get harder, if you learn to keep chaos at bay, which is a problem within itself. With every problem comes the opportunity to reach a new level of purpose.

Becoming a creator has always been possible, but never has it been so accessible. What used to be reserved for those with access to the right resources—time, money, and information—is now available to anyone with an internet connection. With AI and subsequent revolutionary forms of technology, your ability to embrace your agency will only continue to increase. The amount of people who seize that opportunity, however, may decrease.

We've all heard of the Renaissance. The transformative period in European history that marked the transition from the Middle Ages to modernity. Spanning roughly from the fourteenth to the seventeenth century, this era was characterized by a cultural, artistic, political, and economic rebirth. It is my belief that we are in the middle of a Second Renaissance, but this time, it's happening on the internet, everywhere, and much faster than before. A new society is emerging. A digital society where anyone can be an Einstein or Shakespeare (or at least have one in their pocket).

In this society, there are three types of people: consumers, creators, and companies. Creators are a special type of person, and no, I'm not talking about a "content creator" or other type of narrow new age job. While there is nothing wrong with that, and that is technically what creators do at this point in evolution, adopting that label is a surefire way to get lumped into the trash heap along with those distracted by metrics of engagement. When I say "creator," I'm talking about the essence of your being. Like an entrepreneur with the definition we set earlier of*someone who is doing something,*a creator is*someone who is creating something.*To create is to self-reflect, identify a problem, explore the unknown, hunt for ideas, test solutions, and create something worth passing down, potentially in exchange for their desired form of value be it money, attention, status, or the inexplicable feeling of helping someone. A creator is the definition of someone living at the intersection of purpose and profit. Said profit is a measure for how you improve yourself, improve others, and improve the world at large. To create is to pursue your life's work.

What's unique about a creator is the role they play in this new society. They can act as one-person companies who have the generalist stack of skills to be self-sufficient. They build their own distribution and create their own products. On the other hand, they can work for companies or start their own from the leverage they have. A creator, like an entrepreneur, can go from job to career to calling to sustain the novelty and challenge of solving problems that makes life worth living.

Creators and companies are beginning to lay the foundation of the future going forward. The education, economic, meaning, artistic, and political domains of the past are slowly being phased out in favor of something more personal, profitable, and efficient. Trust isn't decreasing in today's school system because the masses are waking up, it's decreasing because there are more options. People can jump on the internet, pursue their curiosity, find a creator who shares their unique knowledge, learn skills that conventional schools are too slow and dogmatic to teach, and evolve who they follow as their interests, beliefs, and values take new shape. It's no longer about sitting in front of a government-trained expert and "learning" the same thing as everyone else to end up with a soon-to-be irrelevant skill stack that keeps the brightest minds subservient to the dominant paradigm. It's about finding someone you relate with. Someone with a shared vision for the future. Someone who is a few steps ahead of you and can provide relevant ideas that breed specific knowledge. In the past, heirs like Marcus Aurelius would receive the best personal education to prepare them for the throne. An individual today can pursue an effective interest-based education with their creator of choice as guidance and artificial intelligence as a synthesis tool. Of course, this places responsibility on the individual to vet creators wisely. Filtering signal from noise will be the high-value skill of the future.

But this isn't only about education. Creators are the sense-making pillars of the new society. With the rapid spread of information, increasing complexity, and growing chaos, people are left wondering what to believe in. They can no longer trust a static and singular belief system to make sense of their place in the world or show them how to live. Political talking heads and polarizing institutions aren't dissolving, but they're losing attention to creators who present deeper knowledge without the poor incentives.

Creators can be companies in and of themselves, but companies are also seeing a radical shift in their structure. Companies are hiring external creators as a way to connect with new audiences and bring in new business. Companies are training in-house creators to survive in an economy where most of the attention is on the internet. To that end, companies solve problems that demand resources inaccessible to the individual, which are very few, and creators—like boutique stores—create personalized goods and services for the like-minded audience they attract with the value they distribute. You can connect to the internet right now and find people from all walks of life generating a more than sustainable income from the problems they've solved in their life. While some mastic chewing gum to aid in gut health, others sell information, software, or tasteful crafts that can benefit those who are at a similar level of development as they were at the time of creation. All in all, creators are the decentralized education system, economy, and cultural sense makers.

The path to becoming future proof comes down to shifting from consumer to creator. When you solve your own problems, publish the solutions in the global town square, and help an audience of like-minded people, even if that audience is a "tiny" 1,000 true fans, I find it hard to believe you won't find the power in you to create a good life. At that point, your only enemy is yourself, and that is but another problem to be solved.

Do it all. Write. Design. Market. Sell. Film. Code. Be the generalist you were born to be. Be the orchestrator of ideas. The governor of thought. New technologies are but a tool, not a master, to help you learn and do these things faster, cheaper, and with leverage so you can design a lifestyle that's within your control.
